---
permalink: /2014-12-15-torture
date: 2014-12-15 20:20
title: "Stop Saying Torture is Ineffective"
layout: post
tags: politics
---

The recent release of the CIA torture report[^report] has, among many other reactions, led to lots of comments on the "effectiveness" of torture -- or rather, the glaring lack thereof.

{% include pullquote.html quote="You. Do. Not. Torture." %}
Now, before I say what I have to say to that, let's get one thing out of the way: You. Do. Not. Torture. Never, ever. I'm glad I don't have to decide what happens to torturers, because with people there's nuances. With organizations, however, there's not. An organization (state, agency, whatever) that tortures needs to be either gutted and rebuilt, or -- in the case of secret services[^tla] -- dismantled. Someone who allows torture to happen under their authority needs to loose that authority.

With that out of the way, here's what I have to say to "torture doesn't work":
*Yes, it does*. Because torture is not about getting information -- which it is patently bad at[^bad] -- it is about dehumanizing the victim. And to that end, it is a disgustingly good means.

I think this is important, because if you argue that torture is ineffective it means you implicitly perpetuate the cover story they are telling to justify their actions to others (and probably to themselves), and that story needs to be refuted as thoroughly as possible.

So by all means, keep sharing the fact that torture is unsuitable to gain information, because it is. But stop saying it's ineffective. Blow the cover instead -- information is not why they <strike>did</strike> do it.



[^report]: No links. Google it if you think you need to read it (you probably don't).
[^bad]: As the CIA knows perfectly well.
[^tla]: All secret services need to be destroyed.
