---
permalink: /2014-12-04-fear-ai
date: 2014-12-04 21:49
title: "Why We're Afraid of AI"
layout: post
tags: tech science politics
series: AI
---

AI, short for Artificial Intelligence, is a very emotionally charged topic these days. In May, super-genius extraordinaire [Stephen Hawking][] wrote an [article][] for the Independent, asking

>are we taking AI seriously enough?

<!-- break -->

In his article, Hawking cites the movie [Transcendence][] as a cautonary tale. The plot is quickly summarized: AI researcher and genius Johnny Depp is "uploaded" and thereby "becomes" an AI, soon things get out of control, it's the end of the world as we know it. Humanity perseveres, AI doesn't. If that sounds boring to you -- it is.

{% include pullquote.html quote="Are we taking AI seriously enough?" %}
What disappointed me most about Hawking's article is not that he quotes a bad movie, though, but how much his argumentation seems to be based on fear. While he ostensibly doesn't take a stance on whether we should or shouldn't pursue AI, the piece is clearly skewed *against* it:

>One can imagine such technology outsmarting financial markets, out-inventing human researchers, out-manipulating human leaders, and developing weapons we cannot even understand. Whereas the short-term impact of AI depends on who controls it, the long-term impact depends on whether it can be controlled at all.

{% include pullquote.html quote="&quot;Potentially more dangerous than nukes&quot;" %}
I don't know about you, but as far as I am concerned, most of these supposed nightmare scenarios are already real. Financial markets are already the domain of [machines][] no human can control or understand, and I don't know how they're supposed to do more damage than they already do. Researchers are smarter than me, politicians more manipulative -- no difference, unless you place a particular intrinsic value on being outsmarted and outmanipulated by a human rather than by a machine. And I really fail to grasp how *anything* an AI came up with could ever be worse than nukes or [weaponized Ebola][].

Speaking of nukes -- [Elon Musk][] even went as far as [comparing][] AI to Atomic Bombs:

>We need to be super careful with AI. Potentially more dangerous than nukes.

More dangerous than enough destructive power to eradicate humanity many times over, running on [8-inch floppy disks][] and controlled by [morons][]? Sorry Elon, you lost me[^nukes]. 

I'm not trying to make fun of Hawking and Musk. They are both geniuses who's brain-products I admire, but neither of them is an AI expert. It also struck me that both their viewpoints seem to be based on fear. I don't know what they truly think about AI -- they might have valid reasons to be afraid. If so, they're not sharing these reasons -- instead, their argumentation amounts to *"this could end badly"*. And they certainly aren't alone with that.

{% include pullquote.html quote="Thou shalt not play God" %}
Which brings me back to Transcendence, a variation on a very old theme. Think of [The Sorcerer's Apprentice][] or [Frankenstein][], [Terminator][] or [Jurassic Park][] -- the list of cautionary tales about human hubris is basically endless. All of these storys share the same narrative: someone creates something more or less intelligent they think they can control, but they can't, and things get out of hand. Some of them end well, others not so much. Moral of the story: You're not as smart as you think you are, and creating life is always a mistake.
*Thou shalt not play God.*

{% include pullquote.html quote="The negative twist seems to be a modern addition" %}
This, I think, is one of the reasons AI makes us uneasy. The idea that creating a living thing is *wrong* seems to be deeply ingrained into our collective conscience. But why? These are stories, nothing more, and the negative twist they give the idea of artificial life seems to be a comparatively modern addition. Consider the mother of all tales involving artificial life, the [Golem Mythos][]. Dating back to early Judaism (3000 years ago, give or take), the Golem is a humanoid creature, most commonly shaped from clay and animated by magic[^magic]. The story as it exists in our cultural knowledge today is one of hubris: a human infringes on god's creation, and pays the price. At first, the Golem does its creator's bidding, but soon things get out of hand… etc.

It turns out the story wasn't always told like this. As far as I can tell, in accounts older than about 500 years, the moral was a different one: the Golem was imperfect but helpful. A gift from god to help the Good People™, but also a lesson in humility -- obviously the creation of a mere mortal could never match the perfection of Creation-with-a-capital-C.

{% include pullquote.html quote="Is a bird *better* than a plane? Depends." %}
I don't believe in god, but take god out of the equation and squint and this is a message I can understand: Scientists create new things all the time to help the human race[^help], but to match or even surpass what has developed on its own -- by means of evolution -- quite often proves to be a rather difficult task. Not impossible, but hard[^hard], and certainly a lesson in humility. But scientists and engineers don't usually try to imitate nature -- they try to solve a problem. Birds, broadly speaking, are better fliers than planes, but flying is not the primary purpose of a plane, transporting stuff is. So is a bird *better* than a plane? Is a Golem *worse* than a human? Depends.

What it comes down to is that we are afraid of the unknown. With the accellarated development of technology we are, compared to earlier times, living in a constant state of uncertainity. 500 years ago, if someone invented a new tool for your trade this was most likely the only innovation you would ever see in your working life. Today you can't even be sure your trade will still exist in 10 years. My guess is that this is why the stories changed, why suddenly technology (i.e. creation of life) became a Bad Thing™. We are, as a race, *terrified* of change, and technology is the epitomy of change, even though on a larger timescale it has only ever done us good. Yes, it brought us nukes and global warming and took our jobs, but for most of us it's also the only reason we're alive.








[^nukes]: You could argue that someone pointing a gun at my face is also more dangerous than nukes, because they'd present a much more immediate threat than the rather abstract possibility of a nuclear apocalypse. I don't think that's what Musk was going for, though. If you compare anything to nukes, "possibly ending human life on earth" is usually what you're trying to say. If not, you picked the wrong analogy.
[^magic]: Or prayer, if you want to make that distinction.
[^help]: More accurately: with the potential to help the human race. They also create nukes, weaponized ebola and trading robots, but I guess I'm an optimist after all.
[^hard]: How hard exactly depends on your field of study.

[Stephen Hawking]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Hawking
[article]: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/stephen-hawking-transcendence-looks-at-the-implications-of-artificial-intelligence--but-are-we-taking-ai-seriously-enough-9313474.html
[Elon Musk]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elon_Musk
[comparing]: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/stephen-hawking-transcendence-looks-at-the-implications-of-artificial-intelligence--but-are-we-taking-ai-seriously-enough-9313474.html
[Transcendence]: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2209764/?licb=0.02375548821873963
[The Sorcerer's Apprentice]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T8gOh0wEgLg
[Frankenstein]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frankenstein
[Goethe]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sorcerer%27s_Apprentice
[Terminator]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Terminator
[machines]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithmic_trading
[Jurassic Park]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jurassic_Park
[weaponized Ebola]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biological_warfare#Anti-personnel
[8-inch floppy disks]: http://motherboard.vice.com/read/americas-aging-nukes-are-as-anachronistic-as-the-floppy-disks-that-control-them
[morons]: http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/11/timeline-nuclear-weapons-accidents-mishaps-near-misses
[Golem Mythos]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golem
