---
title: "My Thoughts On #WWDC15"
tags: apple wwdc swift hmensaplus ios osx watch
comments: true
---

A couple of quick thoughts on today's WWDC Keynote.

<!-- break -->

### Diversity

They did have two women on stage as actual presenters, which is a huge step forward. Still too little (8/2? The biggest company in the world surely can do better than that!),  but an improvement no less.

### OS X El Capitan

When I was a Linux user my favorite window manager was a [tiling wm][] called [i3][], and while switching to OS X was mostly an improvement I had a hard time to adjust to it's window management system. I'm now fully adjusted and able to work just fine with OS X's interface, but I still miss some of the features a tiling wm offers. [Moom][] helped to alleviate that somewhat, but I'm still excited for a native solution. It's much too early to say whether this will do what I want, but here's hoping.

### iOS

#### iPad Multitasking

I have an iPad Air, so I'm a little bummed out that I won't be getting split screen apps, but at least the secondary swipe-in look will be available to me. As a developer I'm happy to report that since [HMensa+][] uses auto layout it should be easy to adapt to this new technology.

#### iPad QuickType

Another instance of "I've been waiting for this for *years*". Really happy they got around to bringing gestures to the iPad keyboard, but I want them on the phone, too. 

#### Proactive Siri

This is a huge one. Android has had stuff like that for years, and I've grown increasingly jealous of them. I just hope it works as advertised, but I'm optimistic that it will. If at all feasible I'll be including that third party deep-link search API in HMensa+.

#### Reproductive Health
I filed a bug report on this early on, and I know many others did, too. It was a glaring omission to not include menstrual data into HealthKit from the beginning, and it's good that they fixed it.

### Swift

They open sourced it. It's going to be interesting to see what exactly they mean when they say "open source", and how the open source software community will react to it. I'm not holding my breath for widespread adoption.

### watchOS

#### Third party complications

Nice. Eager to see what they can do. There was talk of templates, which means there are (probably severe) limits, which surprises absolutely no one. I happen to quite enjoy working within WatchKit's limitations, so it's no problem for me. I actually have an idea or two I think might work with what will be possible. More on that when I had a chance to fiddle with the new APIs.

#### Native apps

I made a list of the APIs on that one slide for you:

* Accelerometer 
* Core Foundation 
* Core Motion
* Core Graphics 
* CoreData
* Taptic Engine 
* Watch Connectivity
* Audio
* MapKit
* ClockKit
* Digital Crown
* Core Location 
* Security 
* Video
* ImageIO
* HealthKit
* Contacts
* Animation & Layout
* HomeKit
* NSURLSession
* WatchKit
* EventKit
* Microphone
* PassKit

I'll be playing around with these a lot over the next couple of months and share my thoughts as I go along. Not much sense in speculating about what they all can do at this point in time.

### One more thing…

If Tim Cook can overuse that line, so can I.

I'm most excited for the watch stuff. I still don't have a watch, and I don't know when or how I'll get one, so this will not be easy, but I have a couple of ideas I want to pursue, and I will. I just hope the simulator is up to snuff. I'll keep you posted.




[i3]: https://i3wm.org/
[tiling wm]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiling_window_manager
[Moom]: http://manytricks.com/moom/
[HMensa+]: http://hackmops.com/projects/hmensaplus/
