---
permalink: /2015-01-05-post-a-day
date: 2015-01-05 06:53
title: "A Post a Day"
layout: post
tags: meta
---

Yesterday was the first day I did not publish *something* since starting this blog. Not because I didn't have anything, but because I was sick and forgot about it. I'm surprised it took that long. While I'm a little upset my streak is broken (on github, too, which hurts even more), I'm not doing this for the numbers[^numbers]. Still, after I'd had published posts for 8 or 9 consecutive days, I decided to make it policy to post at least once a day, just to keep me engaged. It has worked out pretty well, though at a little over two months in it might be too early to tell.

With yesterday's missed quota, the new year, and my impending birthday, I felt like this was a good time to review my posting policy. The blog has, I think, turned out pretty well, even though approximately no one reads it (shoutout to those who do <3). What I found was that original content is lacking. I have a hard time writing those long(ish) "real" articles, but it is exactly those articles that were my main reason to start a blog in the first place -- *because* I have a hard time writing them, and I wanted to get better at it. Maybe my post-a-day policy got in the way of that particular goal, prioritizing an unbroken streak of posts (i.e. quantity) over quality. I know I posted meaningless stuff some days just to serve the quota.

Overall I think that having the goal of posting every day in mind has served me well in keeping me engaged, but it also skewed the kind of engagement I had. It made me take some time every single day to work on the blog (good), but -- in case I hadn't stumbled on something I wanted to link during my normal reading -- it also required me to use the first 20 or so minutes of that blogging time to find some link I could share, even when 20 minutes was all I had and I could have spent that time working on a draft for a longer post (bad).

This, then, is what I think I'm going to do: Instead of a post quota I'm giving myself a time quota -- 20 minutes per day that I put into the blog (more, of course, is always possible). I'll let you know how that works out.

[^numbers]: There's a whole other post in that, about numbers and motivation and exposure and stuff. I think the title is going to be "If I Build It Will They Come?".